Or answer in this video we're going to have a little bit of fun with IF statements and create this very
simple game where we simulate the age old game of how many fingers in my holding up.
So it's going to look like this will last These are how many fingers am I holding up.
And they simply have to guess a number between 0 and 5.
So if I guess for for example oh I get it wrong the number was 0.
If I get two on the next one no the number was five.
You get the idea.
I'll just do one more guess.
Nope wrong again.
Oh well.
So this is what we're creating.
And as you may notice there's one fairly crucial new bit of code that we need that we haven't covered
yet and that is random numbers.
We haven't seen how we can generate a random number with javascript but I'm going to set that as a bit
of a challenge.
So if you're feeling confident then just have a google and see if you can work out how you create a
random number which is 0 1 2 3 4 5.
The information is already there.
And as I've said before the art of coding is really about 80 percent picking stuff up on Google.
So you might as well get used to it early on in the process.
Don't worry though if you can't find the information or can't quite make it work I'll explain that at
the beginning of the process as I go through making up the game.
So best of luck here because well.
All right.
Did you manage it.
I'm going to start by just taking us down to
a basic code structure so we can start from scratch.
So let's start by looking at that random number generator that I mentioned.
What we want is a random number between 0 and 5 to represent the number of fingers that the computer's
imaginary hand might be holding up.
So let's do a little Google javascript's random number zero to five something like that because it's
such a general query we might even be able to have something as specific as between 0 and 5.
So here we go generating random numbers in Javascript in a specific range.
That sounds perfect good old stack overflow.
So how can I generate a random hole number between two specified values in javascript.
Perfect.
Let's have a look.
Now that looks like a great answer but it's using functions and returning and we haven't seen anything
like that yet.
So I'm going to ignore that one and see if we can find a simpler example.
No not really.
Still got functions here.
OK.
Now this is looking good so this code should return a random number between 1 and 10.
Let's see if we can break it up and see what's going on.
I think the key command here is this math dot random if only seems to be generating a random number.
So why not take that bit of the code math don't random with the parentheses because it's a function
that's going to need those and just see what happens.
When we run it it looks like it's going to generate some sort of random number.
So for now let's just alert it and see what we get right.
No point 4 8.
It's run it again no point 1 4 right.
OK I think I get the idea.
I think what this is doing is generating a random number between 0 and 1 and I could verify that if
I wanted by just googling the math random function and seeing what information I could get about it.
So if this is generating a random number between 0 and 1 and I want a random number between 0 and 5
I probably just want to take this and multiply it by five and we do that in javascript using the asterisk
or shift 8 on my keyboard.
And then the number that we want to multiply by.
So this will create a random number between 0 1.
Multiply it by five.
So that will give us a bigger random number between 0 and 5.
So two and a half 1.2 4.1 3.4.
We're getting the idea this is looking good.
The only problem we have so far is that this is a very precise random number and it's unlikely the user
is going to be able to get it.
So what we want to do is get a whole number out of that and going back to our stack overflow answer
here.
This math top floor function looks like it does exactly that.
If I wanted I could look up that function.
But what I'd rather do is just try it out and see what happens.
So math don't flow and let's apply that to all of this and now run it.
I've got an error of some thought.
That's because I need a second bracket at the end there.
OK so now I've got 1 0 4 0.
This is looking good.
OK.
So what it's looking like is that this floor function essentially gets rid of the decimal point.
So if you've got three point five to one then that will give you three.
And again I could check that with a quick google if I wanted to.
So this is looking very good.
The only issue is what we're never going to get out of this is the number five
because the biggest that we're going to get from our math random times five is five.
And even that is extremely unlikely that we get exactly five.
So if we want to get a random number between 0 and 5 we need to change this two times by six.
And then the random number will go between 0 and 6 and then the math floor will take it down to between
0 1 2 3 4 and 5
so that's as far as I think you need to go on the explanation of how we generate our random number.
Now I'm going to give you the opportunity to create the game using code that you are familiar with.
Good luck.
All right.
Hey we got them.
Let's go from the start and let's start with the HVM so that we know what our page is going to look
like.
So I'm going to start with a paragraph asking the user how many fingers am I holding up.
So you might want to add a bit more information there just to clarify that essentially are guessing
a random number between 0 and 5.
But I'll just leave it at that.
Then we're going to have on the next line and input with a type of text and an ID of guess because this
is going to be where the use of guesses and then straight after that I'll put my button
with an ID of check guess cause that's what we're going to do when the button is clicked.
And then I guess let's have it with a capital G.
All right let's have a look.
OK.
Yep that looks good to me.
So the user is going to tap in there guess four and then click that button to see if they're right.
OK.
So now we've done the content.
It's time for some of the logic.
So again we want this logic to happen when the button is pressed.
So we're going to start by setting our own click for our button.
So we've got document don't get element by ID as we're very used to the idea is check guess to get the
button and then we want to set on a click to a function that will create in Cali brackets.
And as usual I'll just check that everything set up OK.
Yes.
All right.
So let's start by generating a random number.
I'm going to create a variable to contain it and I'll call it random number and I could create it all
in one go.
But then we get that sort of slightly confusing code that looks like this.
And I don't really want something like that I want something a little bit clearer.
So I'm going to create it step by step.
Starting off by just doing math dot random.
So so for a random number is anything between 0 and 1.
So first off I want to make it between 0 and 6.
So what I do is I take random number and I said it equal to whatever it was before multiplied by six
as we saw a few moments ago.
So now we've got a random number between 0 and 6.
We want to make that into a whole number between 0 and 5 and we use the math floor function for that.
So now we take random number again and we said equal to a math dot flaw random number.
So if it's five point three it will become five.
If it's not point eight nine it will become 0.
So now we've got our random number in a format that we wanted.
So now it's just a matter of checking to see whether the guess is the same as our answer.
So let's find out if
they guess.
So that is documents to get element by id and the ID is guess and then we want to get the value of the
input.
So if that is equal to a random number
then we'll get well done you've got something like that
and if it's not
then we'll alert
Nope and we'll tell the user what it was that they feel like we're not just lying to them.
The number was and then hopefully you'll remember from a few videos ago when we concatenated our strings
or put them together and we're going to put random number on the end of that.
So that would say Nope the number was and then it will display whatever the random number was.
All right.
Let's take a look at how it should work in its current form.
So I'm going to guess three.
Surprisingly enough I got it wrong.
The number was five.
I'm going to keep guessing three until I get it right.
Nope the number with two.
No.
The number was one night.
The number was 4 9 0.
Well we could be here for a while so yeah this is not the best game that anyone's ever made.
Gosh I'm unlucky.
Hey I got there in the end.
Brilliant.
So I hope you manage to make that more or less by yourself.
There's obviously quite a few ways you could take this to make it a bit more interesting.
So just to give you a few ideas if you want to experiment at the moment we're generating a random number
each time so the user only has one guess.
But what you could do is generate the random number at the beginning when the page is loaded and then
allow the user to have several guesses just for that random number.
And then we challenge of how many guesses it would take to get there.
You could even use the greater or less then signs.
That is signs that look like that greater than that less than to tell the user whether they're too high
or too low.
That would be a great challenge and make the game quite a bit more interesting as well.
But I will leave those challenges to you and we will move on in the next video too.
The second most important by affecting the logic or flow of our program and that is loop's.